In this lesson, we will finally add a visual representation to our actor.
We will use unreal engine components. Components are
objects with specific functionality that we can add to an actor to
extend its capabilities. From the point of view of object-oriented
programming, this technique is called composition. Let's declare a pointer to our
first component. The pointer will be of type UStaticMeshComponent. Let's call it BaseMesh.
It is easy to guess from the name that this component contains a static mesh,
that is, some geometry that we will soon install in the editor.
We add VisibleAnywhere to the property, that is, we say to unreal that we want to see this
component available in the editor. We also need to include the header file for our component.
It is located in Components / StaticMeshComponent. There are several types of components in unreal.
Some of them contain only logic. They have no visual representation,
there is no transformation in the scene. This type of component is suitable, for example,
for managing a character's inventory, or for a health component. Another type of component
has a visual representation, has a transformation. These include,
for example, the StaticMesh component, the component for managing the particle system and many others.
In the course of our course, we will consider some of them.
Go to the .cpp file of our actor. Let's create a BaseMesh component in the constructor. To create
our component, we will use a function called CreateDefaultSubobject.
This function is template. It takes the type of the subobject to create
as a template parameter . In our case, this is UStaticMeshComponent.
And it returns a pointer to the created subobject. The function also takes two arguments. The first argument is the
name of the component. Let's call it BaseMesh. We see that the type of the first parameter, FName, is a different kind of
string in the unreal engine. This is a lighter weight string. It has less functionality and
is not suitable for string manipulation. This type of string is used mainly to set the
names of components, names of players, parameters of materials, body parts in the skeleton, and so on.
We will not consider the second argument, it is not important for us now and we will simply leave it
by default false. The last thing we will do with you before starting editor is to
point the root component to our actor. To do this, we will use the SetRootComponent function
and pass a pointer to our static mesh BaseMesh component into it. By specifying the root component,
we are declaring that the transformation of our actor will match the transformation of this component.
Launch editor.
We remove our old actors from the stage. Select with Shift. Click Delete. We throw out our BaseGeometry actor
in the viewport and we see that our actor has gizmo, that is, arrows
for manipulating in the 3d scene. We can finally change its position in space with you.
Let's look in the details panel BaseGeometry of the actor. We see that the BaseMesh component has appeared. We
just created it in C ++. Also in the details panel there is a transform. We can
change the position of the actor using these input fields. Rotation and scale are also available.
Let's look at the static mesh category. Clicking on the combobox opens the static mesh selector.
In our case, it is empty, because we did not add any visual content when creating the project.
This can be fixed in the content browser. There is a large green Add New button on the left.
Choose add feature or content pack from the menu. In the window that opens, on the content pack tab,
there is a starter content button. Basic geometry, materials are located here.
You can add a pack and select meshes from there, but we'll use a different method. Click on the
static mesh combobox . In the lower right corner, click on the view options. Set the show engine content checkbox
and the list shows static meshes that are supplied with the editor. Let's find
a more adequate geometry in the list, for example, enter cube. Our actor has become a cube. Its
transformation is the same as the transformation of the root component of our static mesh.
We can drag & drop another actor and put a sphere in the static mesh component.
Thus, using only one base actor and a static mesh component, we
created two completely different instances, with different geometry and transformations.
Let's access the transformation of our actor from code.
Let's use an actor function called
GetActorTransform. This function returns an object of type FTransform.
Create a Transform variable and assign the return value of this function to it.
Hover the mouse over FTransform, press F12 and see that this structure contains
three variables: rotation, translation and scale. Let's get them out of there.
To do this, we will use the getter methods of this structure. The first one is GetLocation.
This function returns an object of type FVector - the position of our actor in 3d space.
Press F12 on FVector and see that this structure contains three components: x, y and z. Next, we create a
variable of the FRotator type. This type is responsible for the angles of rotation in 3d space.
The transform function that returns this object is called the Rotator. And we create the third variable Scale.
It is also of type FVector. The function that returns the actor's
scale is called GetScale3D. Let's print all these variables to the output log. Commenting out printTypes.
Copy the log with the output of the actor's name. Duplicate this line.
We'll start with transform. Each of these types has a helper function
that allows you to translate internal data into a string. The function is called ToString.
If we press F12 on ToString, we will see that the print of all
transformation elements occurs inside the function . Next, duplicate the line, write Location.
Location.ToString
Press F12.
We see that within this function all the components of the
vector are collected into a line , with some accuracy. We do the same with Rotation.
Rotation.ToString
The last variable Scale is displayed in the same way.
So our log swears at something .. I named our variable Rotator, and I output Rotation ..
Let's rename Rotator to Rotation. The last thing we do with you. Let's render the Transform in a slightly
different way. The transform has an additional function called ToHumanReadableString.
It is more informative. Let's write Human Transform and change the logging level to Error so that it is
more noticeable when outputting to the console. Press F12, go to the internals of ToHumanReadableString.
And we see that the conversion to a string in this function is more detailed. Launch the unreal engine.
We launch our project. We look into the log and see
that there are two actors on the stage. For each of which its own set of parameters was displayed:
transformation, location, rotation, scale and a line in a more detailed form was printed in red.
I prepared the printTransform function in advance, where I removed all the conclusions
that we made in this lesson, so that we just do not waste time with you.
Next, let's add some interactivity and teach our factor to move according to the
sine law . To do this, each frame will change the z coordinate of the actor by the formula. We need
two parameters. To do this, go to the .h file. We create a property there. We specify the EditAnywhere specifier.
Let's add this property to the Movement category.
The first parameter will be the amplitude, that is, how much the actor will deviate from the original point.
Let's set 50. The initial value is not so important to us now, because
we can always change it in the editor . Copy this parameter and change the amplitude to frequency.
Frequency will be responsible for the oscillation frequency relative to the initial position of the actor.
Let's put it a little smaller. Let's say 2.
We also need to cache the initial position of the actor. For this, we create
an additional variable of the FVector type. We create it in a private section and name it InitialLocation.
We return to the .cpp file, go to BeginPlay and immediately initialize
our InitialLocation variable. Let's assign it the return value of
the GetActorLocation function - this is an additional function for getting access to the location of the actor.
We can do it as we did before, that is, through GetActorTransform (). GetLocation (),
but we can do it using only one function. The position of the actor in space
will change every frame, so go to the Tick function and create a variable of the FVector type
called CurrentLocation. We also assign the value of the GetActorLocation function to it.
We will now change the Z coordinate of the current position of the actor according to our
formula and set the position of our actor to the changed CurrentLocation.
Z0 in our formula is InitialLocation.Z
Next we have the amplitude. Let's use our amplitube variable. We need to
multiply the amplitude by the sine value. To do this, we will use a special structure in unreal
called FMath. This framework defines various static mathematical
functions, including sine, cosine, and other trigonometric functions.
We write frequency
and multiply by time.
We need to get the time somehow. You can use the number of seconds that
have passed since the start of the game. We create a variable time and get the given time
using a pointer to the global object of the game world. To get this pointer,
you need to use the GetWorld () function - every actor has this function.
This object has a method called GetTimeSeconds. This method
returns the number of seconds that have passed since the start of the game, that is, when we pressed the
play button in the editor, or launched the .exe file of the game. It remains for us to update the position of
our actor. To do this, we will use a method called SetActorLocation. We pass
this method as an argument the variable that we just calculated - CurrentLocation.
This function changes the current position of the actor in the world,
and we have just implemented the function of moving along a sinusoid.
Launch editor.
So let's see what we got. Press the play button. Our actors perform synchronous
oscillations about their starting position. This is fine because the default parameters are
exactly the same. Let's fix it up. We select the first actor. Find the category
Movement and set the amplitude to 100, and the frequency to 4. Set the second actor's amplitude to 250,
and the frequency to 5. Start. Each actor moves in accordance with its parameters. Press Esc.
Click on the actor. We go into the Movement category and we see
that we have changed the parameters and a yellow arrow appeared on the right in front of each field.
If we click on it, then the value returns to the default. This is sometimes very convenient.